How to write tests for the consensus layer (#2700)
ethereum/consensus-specs: tests/README.md

belonging to this slot (even though it was created for the previous slot). 

```python    
    signed_block = sign_block(spec, state, block, proposer_index=proposer_index)
```

Notice that `proposer_index` is the variable we set earlier, *before* we advanced
the slot with `spec.process_slots(state, state.slot + 1)`. It is not the proposer 
for hte current state.

```python
    yield 'blocks', [signed_block]
    yield 'post', None   # No post state, signifying it errors out
```

This is the way we specify that a test is designed to fail - failed tests have no post state,
because the processing mechanism errors out before creating it.

## Attestation Tests

The [beacon chain](https://ethereum.org/en/eth2/beacon-chain/) doesn't provide any direct value. It does
not execute EVM programs or store user data. It exists to provide a trusted source of
information about the latest verified block hash of the [shard blockchains](https://ethereum.org/en/eth2/shard-chains/)
which do provide storage, and possibly execution, services.

For every slot a validator is randomly selected as the proposer. Currently the proposer proposes the hash

> for the current head of the beacon chain (the previous block). When shards are added, the proposer will also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the current head of the beacon chain (built on the previous block).
```

> propose a hash for the head of the assigned shard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: I would just cut out a lot of the sharding stuff. There are actually separate proposrs that build the shard chains and it's probably not worth getting in the nuance here.

1. Call `transition_to_slot_via_block` with one less slot to advance
1. Don't tell `run_attestation_processing` to return an empty post state.

The modified function is:

```python
@with_all_phases
@spec_state_test
def test_almost_after_epoch_slots(spec, state):
    attestation = get_valid_attestation(spec, state, signed=True)

    # increment to latest inclusion slot (not beyond it)
    transition_to_slot_via_block(spec, state, state.slot + spec.SLOTS_PER_EPOCH)

    yield from run_attestation_processing(spec, state, attestation)
```    

Add this function to the file `consensus-specs/tests/core/pyspec/eth2spec/test/phase0/block_processing/test_process_attestation.py`,
and run the test:

```sh
cd ~/consensus-specs
. venv/bin/activate
cd tests/core/pyspec
python -m pytest -k almost_after --fork Merge eth2spec
```

You should see it ran successfully (although you might get a warning, you can ignore it)

## How are These Tests Used?

So far we've ran tests against the formal specifications. This is a way to check the specifications
are what we expect, but it doesn't actually check the beacon chain clients. The way these tests get applied

> by clients is that every few days 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by clients is that every few weeks 
```

# Getting Started with Consensus Spec Tests

## Getting Started

> ### Creating the environment

Reviewer 2: Although is nice, it overlaps somewhat with https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/core/pyspec/README.md

Maybe we can combine them, or update the existing doc and reference it here? What you added here does look good.

Author: It does, but that is because a reference and a tutorial on the same subject are going to have some duplication. In a tutorial I need to give people everything to get from a bare OS to being able to do whatever I'm teaching, such as consensus layer tests.

I could update https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/core/pyspec/README.md, but I'd rather also keep all of this material here. Is that OK?

Author: I included a link to https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/core/pyspec/README.md.

   ../../../venv/lib/python3.9/site-packages/cytoolz/compatibility.py:2
     /home/qbzzt1/consensus-specs/venv/lib/python3.9/site-packages/cytoolz/compatibility.py:2: 
   DeprecationWarning: The toolz.compatibility module is no longer needed in Python 3 and has 
   been deprecated. Please import these utilities directly from the standard library. This 
   module will be removed in a future release.
       warnings.warn("The toolz.compatibility module is no longer "

   -- Docs: https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/warnings.html
   ================ 3 passed, 626 deselected, 1 warning in 16.81s =================   
   ```

## The "Hello, World" of Consensus Spec Tests

One of the `test_empty_block_transition` tests is implemented by a function with the same
name located in 
[`~/consensus-specs/tests/core/pyspec/eth2spec/test/phase0/sanity/test_blocks.py`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/core/pyspec/eth2spec/test/phase0/sanity/test_blocks.py).
To learn how consensus spec tests are written, let's go over the code:

```python
@with_all_phases
```

This [decorator](https://book.pythontips.com/en/latest/decorators.html) specifies that this test

> is applicable to all the phases of the ETH 2.0 project. These phases are similar to forks (Istanbul,

Reviewer 2: We are trying to deprecate the Eth2 nomenclature, in favor of "ethereum consensus layer"

Berlin, London, etc.) in the execution blockchain. If you are interested, [you can see the definition of
this decorator here](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/core/pyspec/eth2spec/test/context.py#L331-L335).

```python
@spec_state_test
```

[This decorator](https://github.com/qbzzt/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/core/pyspec/eth2spec/test/context.py#L232-L234) specifies
that this test is a state transition test, and that it does not include a transition between different forks.

```python
def test_empty_block_transition(spec, state):
```

This type of test receives two parameters:

* `specs`: The protocol specifications
* `state`: The genesis state before the test

```python
    pre_slot = state.slot
```    

A slot is a unit of time (every 12 seconds in mainnet), for which a specific validator (selected randomly but in a
deterministic manner) is a proposer. The proposer can propose a block during that slot. 

```python
    pre_eth1_votes = len(state.eth1_data_votes)
    pre_mix = spec.get_randao_mix(state, spec.get_current_epoch(state))
```

Store some values to check later that certain updates happened.

```python
    yield 'pre', state
```

> In Python `yield` is used by [generators](https://wiki.python.org/moin/Generators). However, for our purposes

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to clarify why we are yielding this. Reason why: the tests can be executed in pytest, but also used as functions in the test-generator script, to create test-vectors from these yielded outputs.

About test generators: https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/tests/generators/README.md
About test formats (what is yielded per type of test): https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/tree/dev/tests/formats (you linked it later in the doc, but it may help clarify these `yield` things)

Author: I need to think about it. On one hand extra knowledge is always good. On the other, in a tutorial I try to minimize the cognitive load by having people focus on what they need to know to do the job (plus to answer any questions that appear to me to be something students will think about, so they won't have to figure the answer themselves).

Maybe I should explain in this the section about how these tests are used. But I should think about it when I'm more awake.

Author: I linked to the generators README.md. I think that would be enough - whoever wants to read can read.

Now we'll write a similar test that verifies that being `SLOTS_PER_EPOCH` away is still valid. To do this, we modify the 
`test_after_epoch_slots` function. We need two changes:

1. Call `transition_to_slot_via_block` with one less slot to advance
1. Don't tell `run_attestation_processing` to return an empty post state.

The modified function is:

```python
@with_all_phases
@spec_state_test
def test_almost_after_epoch_slots(spec, state):
    attestation = get_valid_attestation(spec, state, signed=True)

    # increment to latest inclusion slot (not beyond it)
    transition_to_slot_via_block(spec, state, state.slot + spec.SLOTS_PER_EPOCH)

    yield from run_attestation_processing(spec, state, attestation)
```    

Add this function to the file `consensus-specs/tests/core/pyspec/eth2spec/test/phase0/block_processing/test_process_attestation.py`,
and run the test:

```sh
cd ~/consensus-specs
. venv/bin/activate
cd tests/core/pyspec
python -m pytest -k almost_after --fork Merge eth2spec
```

You should see it ran successfully (although you might get a warning, you can ignore it)

<!--

> https://ethos.dev/beacon-chain/

Reviewer 2: This is an older website, and maybe not so relevant for testing. We can aggregate starter resources in another place.

-->

## How are These Tests Used?

So far we've ran tests against the formal specifications. This is a way to check the specifications
are what we expect, but it doesn't actually check the beacon chain clients. The way these tests get applied
by clients is that every few days 
[new test specifications are released](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-spec-tests/releases),
in a format [documented here](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/tree/dev/tests/formats).

> All the clients know how to use tests in the format. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe rephrase to "implement test-runners that consume the test vectors in this standard format"

> <!-- 

Reviewer 2: Intentionally an HTML comment?

Author: Yes, this is the way to leave a comment in a markdown file too. But as I'm close to done with the document, I should probably remove most comments.

### ZRNT, an Example

To actually see the process end to end we are going to use [this client](https://github.com/protolambda/zrnt).

1. ZRNT is written in Go, so the first step is to 
   [install the Go programming language on your environment](https://golang.org/doc/install).
1. Download ZRNT itself, and the current tests

   ```sh
   git clone https://github.com/protolambda/zrnt.git
   cd zrnt
   make download-tests
   ```
   
1. Run the attestation tests

   ```sh
   cd tests/spec

>    go test -tags preset_minimal ./test_runners/operations/attestation_test.go 

Reviewer 2: The `-tags preset_minimal ` build-tag isn't necessary anymore, ZRNT currently supports full runtime configuration of everything. I need to update my docs :sweat_smile:

Author: The ZRNT material is commented out. I decided that running a test in ZRNT isn't impressive enough to be worth doing, all you can see is that the test passed successfully. Or am I wrong, and there's a way for ZRNT to produce an interesting trace (similar to the vmtrace in the execution layer)?
